FOSA-1

DISPATCH

The observer was the first to arrive at dispatch at about 20 minutes prior to the reporting time and was the first to arrive in the entire crew complement. As cabin crew members started to report, the first officer (PM) followed and arrived at the briefing area one minute past the reporting time. The first officer (PM) exchanged greetings with the observer and informed that the captain (PF) was stuck in traffic and would be arriving about 15 minutes late. The first officer (PM) began a normal review of the CFP and weather information and highlighted segments along the CFP that had a segment MORA of more than 10000ft. The lead also arrived at about 15 minutes past her reporting time and enquired if the first officer (PM) could sign the immigration and customs paperwork to which he informed her that the captain (PF) would be arriving shortly. The first officer (PM) continued to review his paperwork and on a second enquiry from the lead cabin attendant advised her to sign the documents and proceed to the aircraft so as to avoid any undue stress on her or her team as the captain (PF) had not yet arrived and no further information was received. The cabin crew subsequently proceeded at about D-50. The captain (PF) arrived at D-30 to the briefing area and quickly began signing the FRC, GD, CBD and while signing the fuel chit mentioned that the weather was alright at destination and alternate and  The first officer (PM) mentioned that the planned zero fuel weight had dropped by about 600kgs and quickly made their way to the aircraft. The observer introduced himself and sought permission to observe the sectors.

PRE FLIGHT, ENGINE START and TAXI OUT

The crew arrived on board at D-11. The first officer (PM) quickly grabbed his QRH and tried to follow actions of the preliminary cockpit preparation while the captain (PF) quickly began with his cockpit preparation overhead flow by ordering “Loudspeakers Off” The first officer (PM) put his loudspeakers off and the captain (PF) began the CVR test. He was observed rushing through his cockpit preparation. Whether for the airfield, aircraft acceptance or preliminary take off performance was not calculated to this point. On completion of his cockpit preparation flows, the captain (PF) led a quick EFB check in terms of battery and version current. The first officer (PM) discussed his EFB and the captain (PF) announced “No MEL, ready for OEB”. The first officer (PM) read out OEB57 and mentioned that OEB58 was not applicable as the aircraft had been upgraded to FCS6.3. Aircraft configuration summary and tech notices followed with the applicable ones 1B, 3A, 4A and 8A being mentioned. On completion of this the captain (PF) although hurriedly discussed the actions applicable for each tech notice. The first officer (PM) vacated his seat to perform his actions before the walk around. The first officer (PM) displayed calm and was meticulous with his check of the emergency equipment and documents on board. The flashlight, gear pins and rain repellant were skipped from this check. While standing before proceeding for his walk around, the first officer (PM) energised the FADEC to check the engine oil quantities announced and proceeded for the external walk around. The captain (PF) was obtaining departure airfield Weather via ATIS as the first officer (PM) was checking the emergency equipment and began filling out the MCDU in preparation for departure. On reaching the INIT B page, the captain (PF) used the load and trim sheet which was placed on the pedestal prior to the crews arrival to enter the figures. Final fuel was updated to reflect the CFP figure which resulted in a display of 32 minutes. The lead had made herself present in the flight deck as the first officer (PM) left for his walk around for her briefing and did not make her presence known probably to not disturb the captain (PF) as he was observed under a bit of time pressure.
The cabin crew briefing was performed at the ETD and was conducted well although quickly. The engineer also descended onto the flight deck and began performing a test of the centre tank pumps as the briefing had just begun.

The first officer (PM) also returned shortly after a walk around and the flight deck was a bit cramped as the lead was obtaining her briefing, the engineer performing his test and the observer cramped up behind the first officer (PM)s seat. The first officer (PM) kept standing in the space available and waited for the briefing to conclude before being seated and announcing “walk around satisfactory”. Immediately the captain (PF) began the both pilots seated actions and set the FCU altitude to 4000ft owing to airfield familiarity. He then announced oxygen check and carried out the same while the first officer (PM) kept pace and did the same for himself and the observer. Instrument panel and ECAM control panel were not checked. The captain (PF) announced “Box Set” and the first officer (PM) began cross checking the set up while the captain (PF) began signing the NOTOC and the load and trim sheet at five minutes past the scheduled time of departure. The flight manager quietly descended on the flight deck and patiently waited without making his presence known awaiting door close. The captain (PF) announced the figures from the load and trim sheet he had already entered during the setup and handed one copy over to the first officer (PM) to cross check. The ARC was subsequently signed at seven minutes past departure time and after verification from the lead cabin attendant, aircraft doors were closed.

The captain (PF) told the first officer (PM) to put delay due late arriving pilots in the 6E Sector Log app and commenced a briefing which was completed in about two minutes. The captain (PF) commenced his briefing along the T-P-C guidelines by covering threats and the entire plan for PF and PM. He halted the briefing at this point and issued an order to arms slides and resumed by asking the first officer (PM) to cover MSA and plan for departure. Safety briefing was done immediately after post completion cockpit preparation checklist requested.

On completion of the checklist the captain (PF) ordered the first officer (PM) to request for pushback and startup. Pushback was approved facing east and on completion startup approved. The captain (PF) ordered the before start checklist and while the first officer (PM) began offering challenges the tower controller called in to check that clearance was available and the first officer (PM) replied to standby. Some of the responses by the captain (PF) were not in line with standard phraseology and both pilots selected and displayed the PERF page on their respective MCDU’s at the challenge of Take off speeds and thrust. The captain (PF) informed ground that pushback was approved and began texting on his phone till almost completion of pushback. The captain (PF)s tray table was out and had his coffee placed on the tray table which was served on ground. As the aircraft almost completed pushback the captain (PF) placed his hand on the parking brake lever probably expecting completion of pushback and set the brakes on command from the engineer.

On setting the parking brake the captain (PF) set the engine mode selector to ignition after which he requested clearance from the engineer and requested the first officer (PM) for the single engine taxi checklist, the first officer (PM) was reading out the action items while the captain (PF) used the yellow electric pump momentarily although the accumulator pressure was in the green band and set dual cooling on before it came from the checklist. The captain (PF) once again sought clearance from the ground crew before setting the engine 1 master lever to on. At this stage he asked the ground crew to disconnect and announced “Communication Test, How do you read” to which the first officer (PM) responded “5”. On AVAIL indication the captain (PF) began his actions for after start from memory while the first officer (PM) read out the pilot flying action items, the first officer (PM) performed his after start actions from memory and did not verbalise. As the first officer (PM) performed his after start actions, the captain (PF) obtained pins and thumbs up verification from the engineer and requested the first officer (PM) to request taxi for an intersection departure. “Pins, Thumbs Up” call-out was not made.

The first officer (PM) contacted the tower controller and requested for taxi for intersection C6 and was granted. The captain (PF) announced “As briefed” and commenced taxi while sipping on his coffee and placing it back on his tray table using his right hand and left hand was on the tiller. As the aircraft turned away from the apron on to the taxiway, the first officer (PM) turned on the weather radar however no serviceability check was carried out, the lead cabin attendant also passed the cabin secure at this time. Approaching and joining the taxiway parallel to the runway, the captain (PF) finished his coffee and stowed his tray table. Once established on the parallel taxi track the captain (PF) asked the first officer (PM) to start engine 2 and this was done from memory. The captain (PF) moved his head to visually confirm the actions of the first officer (PM) on the overhead panel while also taxying the aircraft on a straight line. The first officer (PM) obtained departure clearance from the tower controller and the aircraft was cleared climb runway heading 4000ft and was readback. The captain (PF) subsequently ordered the after start checklist and this was completed. The flight control check was initiated by the captain (PF) and completed by both pilots satisfactorily. The captain (PF) requested the first officer (PM) to advise crew for departure and ordered the taxi checklist. 
TAKE OFF AND CLIMB OUT

On reaching the holding point and on completion of the taxi checklist, the aircraft was given line up by the tower controller. The first officer (PM) selected TCAS and switched off both packs and the captain (PF) turned on appropriate exterior lights and both pilots verbalised their respective sides clear and entered line up for the westerly runway. As the aircraft was entering line up, the captain (PF) asked for the line up checklist and was completed.

On lining up using a ninety degree line up, the tower controller issued take off clearance. The captain (PF) announced “Take Off clearance obtained, confirm?” and before the first officer (PM) could respond in quick succession announced “Path Clear”, “Take off” advanced the thrust levers to 50%N1 and then turned the nose light to Take Off and performed a normal take off in a westerly direction.

Passing 300ft, the captain (PF) engage the autopilot and retarded the thrust levers passing 400ft. The aircraft engaged in CLB and NAV mode on the FMA. The aircraft was handed over to the approach controller passing 800ft and on first contact was cleared to FL130 and passing 2000ft direct to waypoint MML. Passing 1500ft the aircraft automatically turned to point PD01 which was quickly detected and corrected by the captain (PF). The first officer (PM) now changed his MCDU page to F-PLN and passing 2000ft entered direct to waypoint MML on the captain (PF)s request. Passing 6000ft, the approach controller re cleared the aircraft to FL240 and subsequently handed the aircraft over to the area controller passing 9500ft. The first officer (PM) had the frequency tuned in on SBY and quickly switched it announcing “128.3, VHF1” before making contact with the area controller. On initial contact the aircraft was cleared to FL260 and direct to waypoint KAKIB. The first officer (PM) made the selection on his F-PLN page and displayed his PLAN page on the ND for confirmation from the captain (PF) before entering it. The captain (PF) announced “NAV KAKIB 345 386NM”. The first officer (PM) retracted the landing lights passing 10000ft and the captain (PF) requested for the 10000ft checks with seat belts to be turned off, the first officer (PM) complied and announced OPT FL369 and REC MAX FL383 and the captain (PF) mentioned they would maintain FL360 due to presence of stronger head winds at higher levels. The captain (PF) removed his harness and headphones without an announcement of “Speakers, Headsets” and the first officer (PM) followed. The captain (PF) got busy getting his EFB charger and after a brief wait as the aircraft was climbing passing FL115, the first officer (PM) announced “Transition” to which the captain (PF) responded “Set Standard” and this was done.
The first officer (PM) began calculating his estimates on the computerised flight plan and the captain (PF) asked him to request with the next controller on contact direct to waypoint OPIRA. Passing FL160 the first officer (PM) discussed the estimates against his calculations, FMGC and scheduled time of arrival, the captain (PF) did not seem convinced of the calculation and the first officer (PM) mentioned that they were under blocked by 3 minutes. The first officer (PM)s calculation also had a difference of 13 minutes with the MCDU. The captain (PF) obtained the flight plan from the first officer (PM) and performed a gross check and found the calculation to be in error. The flight plan was handed back to the first officer (PM) who found his error midway through the flight plan and recalculated the estimates and were subsequently discussed.

RVSM entry checks were carried out passing FL216 and the captain (PF) was observed yawning passing FL220. Observing this the first officer (PM) asked the captain (PF) “Managed to get some sleep ?” to which he responded “I did sleep for about two hours during the days” and the conversation subsided. Passing FL225 for FL260 the captain (PF) requested the first officer (PM) to request further climb which was complied with and the area controller handed the aircraft over to the next controller. On initial contact the aircraft was cleared to climb FL300 and direct to waypoint OPIRA and the captain (PF) made the necessary FCU and MCDU changes as laid down. Shortly after the lead buzzed the flight deck directly without seeking entry via the interphone to service the flight deck. The captain (PF) started having his dinner.

Passing FL266 the aircraft was cleared to FL320 and was set on the FCU by the captain (PF) and no FMA change was announced as he was in the middle of his dinner. Passing FL298 the aircraft was cleared direct to waypoint OPIRA and was executed by the captain (PF) and no changes were announced again. Passing FL310 the first officer (PM) announced “1000 to go”, tuned an airfield ATIS on VHF2 and began copying it down on the CFP. The aircraft was climbing at about 1700fpm and was not controlled by either pilot.

An aircraft with similar call sign was given climb to FL300 and the first officer (PM) picked up his boom mic to respond and the captain (PF) mentioned that it was not for them. About a minute later the area controller cleared the aircraft to climb FL340. The captain (PF) while still having his meal set 34000 on the FCU and pulled, selected speed 0.74 from a managed target of 0.79 and pulled resulting in a rate of climb of about 3800fpm. No FMA changes were announced and the FMA annunciation turned to ALT* passing FL327.

CRUISE AND DESCENT PREPARATION

The first officer (PM) gave a one thousand to go call and asked the controller for further climb to which the controller informed to expect FL340 final. The captain (PF) managed speed at ALT and changed the cruise level on the PROG page to FL340, set TCAS to BLW and updated SAT, no other top of climb actions were completed.

On reaching the assigned cruise level of FL340, the first officer (PM) began filling out the tech log and the captain (PF) finished his dinner. The captain (PF) requested the CFP and analysed the winds at various levels. The seatbelt’s were subsequently turned on due to light turbulence and remained on for pretty much the remainder of the flight. The first officer (PM) was also observed occasionally yawning during the cruise. Approaching waypoint NINOB, the first officer (PM) tuned the HF frequency and established contact with the oceanic radio frequency and carried out the SELCAL check satisfactorily. The HF controller asked the aircraft to report waypoint LEGEN. The area controller changed the aircraft over to HF and the area frequency stayed tuned on VHF1 rather than 123.45MHz.

The lead cabin attendant called the captain (PF) via the cabin interphone and informed him of a passenger seated on the first row who was observed consuming what seemed to be alcohol that the passenger had brought by himself and his behaviour was tending towards unruly. The captain (PF) requested the lead to come to the flight deck and discussed well with her to try and diffuse the situation and keep him in the loop. The captain (PF) used his EFB to quickly review the chapter from Operations Manual Part A regarding unruly passengers. Approaching LEGEN the first officer (PM) attempted to contact radio but due to congestion was able to pass his position report passing LEGEN and was advised to give a position report at KATBI, the position report at KATBI was missed.

About 10 minutes to waypoint REXOD which is the FIR cross boundary, the first officer (PM) tuned VHF1 onto Muscat control on 126.55 and raised the controller. On initial contact the aircraft was assigned a new squak code and this was set on the transponder. On crossing waypoint REXOD, the area controller informed the aircraft that it was radar identified and cleared flight plan route to SODEX. Shortly after the lead cabin attendant called the captain (PF) furiously that the passenger situation had escalated and that he was passing lewd remarks towards all crew members who were trying to diffuse the situation and inappropriately touched the R1 and informed the captain (PF) that she would be declaring him unruly. The captain (PF) agreed with her decision and she later buzzed the flight deck to obtain a witness form. The captain (PF) displayed exemplary leadership in calming the lead cabin attendant and on her exit from the flight deck made a stellar announcement along the guidelines provided in flight operations announcements guide from the EFB. The last line of his announcement “For your convenience, I will have this announcement repeated in Malayalam” and handed the handset to the first officer (PM) who transalated and made the same announcement in Malayalam.

The cruise then proceeded uneventful with both pilots occasionally ovserving the cabin monitor and watching the unruly passengers behaviour. On nearing EMERU, the captain (PF) made a mention of the drift down/depressurisation strategy they would have to follow while the first officer (PM) opened operations manual C and prepared it appropriately on the secondary flight plan the first officer (PM) subsequently obtained the weather for Muscat International Airport which was the escape airport, updated secondary performance page and informed the captain (PF). There was no discussion of the chemical oxygen time limitation for the specific aircraft.

The first officer (PM) subsequently obtained MUSCAT VOLMET broadcast and obtained destination and alternate METAR. During this time the aircraft was handed over to the next area controller and the captain (PF) responded and tuned the appropriate frequency on VHF1 and made contact. The first officer (PM) turned off his speaker and donned his headset to listen to the broadcast. The first officer (PM) discussed the weather and the closures at the destination displaying good initiative. The arrival ATIS was obtained at about 210 miles on headset by the first officer (PM). The captain (PF) handed over controls to the first officer (PM) and began his set up with a performance calculation of the arrival airfield although no cross check was made. On crossing a waypoint during this time, the first officer (PM) announced the first fuel check verbally at almost 40min prior to landing. On finishing his set up, the captain (PF) announced “Landing FLAP3” and selected it on the overhead panel followed by “Box is set”. While cross checking the MCDU set up, the first officer (PM) informed the captain (PF) that he had received a different star for the same transition the last time he had operated to the destination airfield, the captain (PF) review his jeppesen and changed it. The first officer (PM) also noticed that the DA was set incorrectly on the PERF page and informed the captain (PF) while making the necessary changes.

The captain (PF) announced “Briefing You have Comm” and began the briefing announcing “Threats”. The threats verbalised during the briefing included operating in WOCL and parallel runways at destination to which the captain (PF) responded ILS will take care. The entire STAR chart and approach plate was discussed by the first officer (PM) in line with the old briefing although a T-P-C briefing was being carried out. During the briefing the area controller cleared the aircraft “When ready descend FL160 by SODEX, speed 280 on transition” which was readback the first officer (PM). The captain (PF) inserted a constraint of FL160 at SODEX and resumed the briefing by announcing descend on the arrow. The LS push button on the captain (PF)s side was observed turned on during the setup and stayed on till after landing.

DESCENT, APPROACH and LANDING
The briefing was concluded and on reaching the FMGS calculated top of descent arrow, the captain (PF) set FL210 on his FCU and pushed to engaged DES and began addressing his passengers for arrival. The first officer (PM) observed this while donning headsets and changed it to FL160, no information regarding this was shared with the captain (PF). The captain (PF) on completion of his announcement sent an ACARS message to the company regarding the declaration of a passenger unruly and requested for APM to be available on arrival.

Almost approaching the FIR changeover and passing FL190, the aircraft was handed over to the area controller of the destination airfield. On first contact the aircraft was cleared to FL120 and immediately changed over to the approach controller at destination. The first officer (PM) readback the instruction and announced the frequency change. The captain (PF) requested the first officer (PM) to inform about the unruly passenger on first contact and request security services on arrival which was complied with by the first officer (PM) who in first contact passed the message and was cleared to 10000ft and the aircraft was ordered to cancel STAR.

Passing transition level FL150, local airfield QNH was set and announced by the first officer (PM). The aircraft was handed over to the arrival controller passing 11000, 1000 to go call was given by the first officer (PM) and the captain (PF) had never arrested his rate of descent in the last 2000ft to go. The first officer (PM) tuned the frequency and announced the change on VHF1 and the captain (PF) ordered the 10000ft checks. On completion of which they donned headsets and the first officer (PM) made contact and was cleared from NOBTO direct to LUBIX and standby for further descent. The headsets were not worn on entering UAE airspace as advised in the conflict information bulletin published by the company. Flight deck clearance was also not requested nor done.

The arrival controller requested the unruly passenger details from the crew and the first officer (PM) transmitted the same after checking with the lead on age and position of passenger. The controller assured of all assistance on landing and cleared the aircraft to 7000ft. The captain (PF) set 7000 on the FCU and pulled engaging OP DES and verbalised the FMA changes. The first officer (PM) extended the landing lights passing 10000ft and the captain (PF) ordered the approach checklist. Some of the responses to the challenges were not in line with standard call-out for the checklist. The aircraft was subsequently cleared to 2500ft and cleared for ILS approach. The first officer (PM) readback the instruction and passing 5000ft the arrival controller issued a speed instruction of “180 till 8, 160 till 4” which was readback by the first officer (PM). Passing 3500ft the first officer (PM) announced “1000 to go” and the captain (PF) selected V/S -1000fpm on the FCU and announced his FMA. The captain (PF) requested the first officer (PM) to activate approach phase and selected speed 180 on the FCU, passing 220kts the captain (PF) ordered FLAPS1 and the first officer (PM) set FLAPS1 after responding “Speed checked, FLAP1”. The aircraft attained speed 180kts on reaching 10 miles and on G/S* the captain (PF) announced and set the Go Around altitude on the FCU. The captain (PF) reduced the aircraft speed to 160kts passing 8 miles and ordered FLAPS2.
The aircraft was handed over to the tower controller and on initial contact was instructed to continue approach. On passing 1800 ft the first officer (PM) enquired “Want Gear down” to which the captain (PF) responded “Standby” immediately managing the speed and ordering Gear down and FLAPS3. The aircraft did not maintain 160kts till 4 miles as instructed by ATC.

Passing 1000ft on baro, the first officer (PM) announced “1000ft stabilised”. On the aircraft auto fallout “100 above” the captain (PF) responded “Continue” and disconnected the autopilot at minimums to fly the aircraft down to landing. A down-sloping runway was observed from the aiming point towards the end of the touchdown zone. The captain (PF) performed a firm landing after a long float but within the touchdown zone and applied full reverses till about 90kts. The first officer (PM) announced “70kts” and the aircraft vacated towards the high speed exit commencing turn at 62kts and on vacation attaining 50kts. The aircraft was changed over to ground controller who on first contact instructed the aircraft to follow the greens to assigned parking bay. The captain (PF) disarmed the spoilers and the first officer (PM) carried out his after landing flow. The captain (PF) requested the after landing checklist and this was challenged from memory by the first officer (PM). During taxi the first officer (PM) announced “3 minutes” to which the captain (PF) responded “Shut Down 2”, single engine taxi in was carried out without reference to the checklist. On observing 5 minutes on the 70kts timer, the captain (PF) ordered brake fans on which was complied with by the first officer (PM). On approaching the bay the captain (PF) identified the VDGS and turned off all external lights barring NAV & LOGO. On turning into the bay the first officer (PM) issued the order to disarm all slides. On setting parking brake on, the first officer (PM) turned off the yellow electric pump and turned on the APU Bleed, the captain (PF) waited for the APU BLEED memo and shut down engine number 1. The captain (PF) checked “Slides disarmed, confirm” to which the first officer (PM) confirmed and the captain (PF) turned off the beacon light and seatbelt’s following which he made an announcement for all passengers to be seated so that the unruly passenger could be escorted out. The first officer (PM) turned off the fuel pumps after the beacon was turned off. The engineer called the flight deck to inform that chocks were in place and the captain (PF) released the parking brake ordering for the parking checklist on completion of which he exited the flight deck before the cabin door was open to sign FSF14, the first officer (PM) finished up the CFP and tech log during this time.

EVENT REVIEW-1

It was observed that ATC have given a late descent that resulted in the aircraft being high on profile. This was the usual descent clearance issued at OMRK but was not perceived as a threat by the flight crew. While the crew realised that they were high on profile, deceleration/approach configuration was not used to mitigate the threat. On the LOC, the AP was disconnected and the aircraft was flown down manually with a high ROD. The aircraft was unstabilised at 1000 ft AAL and stabilised parameters were achieved at approximately 300 ft AAL (the GS was intercepted at approx. 450 ft RA). Contributory to the event was the WOCL and unfamiliarity.


